# Meta WG 2019.06.06

- [Video](https://youtu.be/UYrq3eINGUM)
- [Dropbox paper](https://paper.dropbox.com/doc/Meta-WG-2019.06.06--Aeh5qqFUFXz4Usd_a899bZKGAg-VO3EBc6lEdNunBh6hxGfn)

# Summary

We focused on what the output from the "exploration" stage of a
working group might look like. We [sketched out some
examples](https://paper.dropbox.com/doc/Meta-WG-2019.06.06--Aeh5qqFUFXz4Usd_a899bZKGAg-VO3EBc6lEdNunBh6hxGfn#:uid=330091089397131641914243&h2=Error-handling)
for the case of error handling. We settled on a rough outline looking
roughly like this:

- Problems in and around the space
    - describe the problems we are aiming to solve, as precisely as we can
        - give representative examples that can be referenced in the solutions
    - aim for completeness, even if not everybody agrees it is a problem
- Positives and strengths to consider
    - things that are working well which might be “imperiled” by some of the solutions
    - or just general things that we want to preserve and why
- Solutions
    - describe possible solutions
        - what problems do they try to address
    - relationships between the solutions
        - do they build on one another?
- Unknowns and constraints
    - list out concerns, things to be resolved
- Roadmap recommendation? Narrative?
    - experiments? in particular, can we use procedural macros,
      nightly builds, or other mechanisms to enable experimentation
      and try to answer specific questions and ideas.
    - this part was the least clear -- how much do we ex

We looked a bit at the [TC39 homepage][TC39] and the way that it
clearly identifies proposals by stage and had some back-and-forth
about how to compare that with our existing set of [github pulls].

[TC39]: https://github.com/tc39/proposals
[github pulls]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pulls/

# Homework and next meeting

Before our next meeting, we should:

- Research the [TC39 process][TC39], for those unfamiliar with it, or
  other relevant processes.
- Niko would like to try and apply this exploration to `impl Trait` or
  some other example, but this may not happen. :)
  
Although this wasn't discussed in the meeting, next meeting I hope to
spend a bit of time digging into other processes to learn more about
how they work. In particular probably starting with Chef, to build on
some "local expertise". --nikomatsakis
