---
title: Triage meeting 2021-08-31
tags: triage-meeting
---

# T-lang meeting agenda

* Meeting date: 2021-08-31

## Attendance

* Team members: Niko, Josh, Scott, Taylor
* Others: simulacrum

## Meeting roles

* Action item scribe: simulacrum
* Note-taker: nikomatsakis

## Scheduled meetings
-  "Structural equality" [lang-team#94](https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/94) 
-  "Non-terminal divergence between parser and macro matcher " [lang-team#111](https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/111) 
- Tomorrow topic for planning meeting
    - Finalize list of existing initiatives
    - Select liaisons
    - Discuss how to handle random tracking issues
    - Niko created a [repository template](https://github.com/rust-lang/initiative-template) and instantiated various repos with it (linked in the doc)
    - [Draft initiative list](https://hackmd.io/zAqZPQt0SqWW7IWwbuLwyg) -- missing things?
- If need be, move actual planning to September 8, and deal with any issues raised on September 1.

## Action item review

* [Action items list](https://hackmd.io/gstfhtXYTHa3Jv-P_2RK7A)

## Pending lang team project proposals
### "negative impls integrated into coherence" lang-team#96

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/96

### "Trait upcasting coercion" lang-team#98

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/98

### "Deprecate target_vendor" lang-team#102

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/102

## PRs on the lang-team repo
### "Initial draft of copy ergonomics design note" lang-team#62

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/pull/62

### "Add draft of variadic notes" lang-team#76

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/pull/76

### "consensus decision making" lang-team#113

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/pull/113

* Felix assigned to review.

## RFCs waiting to be merged
### "RFC: Supertrait item shadowing" rfcs#2845

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2845

* Pending action item: Felix to merge

## Proposed FCPs

**Check your boxes!**
### "Tracking issue for RFC 2523, `#[cfg(version(..))]`" rust#64796

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/64796

## Active FCPs
### "RFC: let-expression" rfcs#3159

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3159

### "Proposal: Else clauses for for and while loops" rfcs#3163

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3163

* FCP to close.
* Josh: I agree with final comment: we shouldn't do this specific thing, but the underlying problem is real. It'd be nice to have some "fallback" code for "I got all the way through the loop without breaking".
* Niko: goto? I've sometimes thought that a limited version of goto where you can go to a specific point (but only in ways equivalent to breaking from a block) would be nice. Java's break from block is kind of confusing because the label is at the top, but control-flow goes out the bottom.
* Scott: `try` with `yeet` is the latest proposal.
* Josh: Loop-break-value seems related. 
    * Other than Try v2 trait, is there any blocker for "yeet" beyond bikesheds?
* Scott: Question remains "what type is given to yeet and how does that get translated to the appropriate type"
* Josh: one of the questions is, "is the argument to the yeet statement" -- if yo have `Result<T, E>`, do you "yeet" an `E` or an `Err(e)`?
    * Link: <https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3058-try-trait-v2.html#possibilities-for-yeet>
    * Josh: I think half the syntactic benefit is not having to type `Err`-- there are other ways to do the same operation (e.g., `Err(E)?`).
* Josh: do we need a special wrapper? can't we have just the residual call?
    * Scott: the residual call takes a wrapper, so we would need  a new method, which is why the question comes up
* Niko: to step back, seems like this wants to be an initiative
* Josh: agree, with scott as owner or liaison, depending how much work they want to do
* Scott: I'd want to be liaison; I'd prefer to finish the try-block "type stuff" before this
* Josh: May make sense to reach out to the error handling wg folks, like Jane, and raise the question of "what should this look like and does somebody want to be the owner of it"
* Scott: sg
* Josh: nrc has been putting a lot of new effort into 
* Niko: I'd want to understand the scope of what we're talking about; I kind of imagined the initiative was like "try blocks / try trait / that whole picture"
* Scott: it may be the same initiative, but probably distinct RFCs
* Niko: I see, that makes sense
* Josh: agreed on not coupling, but the two do fit well together, and might help address this particular problem. I wonder whether this fits nicely with `let/else`, as one of the angles I could see someone writing is something like this...

```rust
let Ok(v) = try { ... } else { ... }
```

* Josh: ...but I guess you can't grab the error in that case?

### "Support `#[track_caller]` on closures and generators" rust#87064

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/87064

### "stabilize disjoint capture in closures (RFC 2229)" rust#88126

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/88126

```rust
struct Foo(String);
impl Drop for Foo { }

{
    let foo = Foo();
    move || println!("{}", foo.0)
}
```

On master, in 2021:

* we capture `foo.0`, which is a move
    * that results in a "can't move out of a struct with drop" error
* bug suggested migration note `let _ = &foo`
* niko's proposal:
    * truncate the captured path at any struct that implements `Drop`
    * in addition to:
        * `Box`
* implication
    * adding Drop would affect how closures capture things
        * adding Drop does already affect borrow checking in various ways
        * unlike that, though, this would cause it to behave differently
            * closure captures a different value, but there was no drop before, so you can't observe that
* alternative:
    * suggestion that could apply on the borrow check error
    * `println!("{}", {foo}.0)` would work too
* niko: we can make the change later, too
    * it's a guaranteed compilation error
* josh: if you have a `u32`, this code would compile, right?
    * niko: yes
* mark: it seems pretty clear to me that we shouldn't force people to write additional things to make this work; the story is meant to be "more code works", not "old code needs to be revised"
    * niko: I agree with that, but I'm debating a bit about if the type of the field is `copy`, do we want to truncate in that case?
* scott: is this specific to move closures?
    * niko: in this particular code, the code would compile without move
* niko: actually the move keyword is needed to produce this situation, because if the closure *body* moves (i.e., when we would move without the keyword), the closure body will get an error:

```rust
|| drop(foo.0) // can't move from foo.0
```

* scott: so basically this "special logic" already only applies to move closures, because the other case is already an error
    * I think I'm inclined to like this then
* niko: we can take a bit more time, as it's a backwards compatible change, but it's the only interesting one that came up
* josh: even though I'm usually inclined to be cautious in this area, I'm having a hard time coming up with a counterargument against the proposal of just capturing all of a struct if the struct implements `Drop`.
* mark: I'm not sure if waiting is good from the perspective of "initial impression" that users have
* niko: If I have concerns, it comes from "I added drop and stuff changed behavior", but that seems like an increasingly unlikely scenario, given that there was no drop before (by definition).
* josh: could we have a suggestion for dropping `move`?
* scott: I suppose another way to do this would be `|| { println!("{}", foo.0); drop(foo) }` if people really want the "drop exactly here" stuff.
    * niko: yes, true (we could potentially improve the suggestion)
* josh: I was mostly thinking that maybe the better suggestion would be to drop move
    * scott: it's hard because you have to check the lifetime of the closure to see if capturing a reference would work
* josh: how prevalent is this in the crater runs
    * niko: I think fairly rare
    * I might rather have weird suggestions than make a rushed decision
* scott: It depends on how complex things are, I agree with Mark that it'd be a shame if this were a thing
    * josh: I agree and I think we don't want to do things that will rush changes into an edition
        * don't want to give people the impression that new editions will take a few releases to be really polished
        * "don't jump on editions as soon as they come out"

### "Stabilize reserved prefixes" rust#88140

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/88140

### "negative impls integrated into coherence" lang-team#96

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/96

### "Trait upcasting coercion" lang-team#98

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/98

### "Non exhaustive reachable patterns lint" lang-team#112

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/112



## Nominated RFCs, PRs and issues
### "Make `#[derive(A, B, ...)]` cfg-eval its input only for `A, B, ...` and stabilize `feature(macro_attributes_in_derive_output)`" rust#87220

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/87220

### "Stabilize built-in attribute macro `#[cfg_eval]`" rust#87221

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/87221

### "Which patterns on union fields should be considered safe?" rust#87520

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/87520

### "Disable unused_must_use for statically known bools" rust#88028

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/88028

If you have something that declares it is must-use, and you use that in a boolean context, then this doesn't count as using it. The proposal is to stop emitting a warning in this case.

```rust
// Example

```

Mark: It's a boolean expression where one of the sides is typed as never. So essentially something being used for side-effect, e.g., `foo() || panic!()`.

Josh: So this is about the "must use" on the logical operation? That is, neither of the functions here are must-use:

```rust
let result = (is_missiles_ready() && fire_missiles()) || panic!("mission failed");
```

Niko: We have a must-use warning for the result of `&&`?

Josh: We do!

Josh: Let expressions had a similar goal of using `||` as a kind of replacement for code structure. 

Scott: Definitely very perl, but I wouldn't hold that against it necessarily.

Josh: I can see the argument for why this counts as using something, since you're using the short-circuit operation as a use. 

Niko: Doesn't work for all uses of `||`, right? Lots of side-effects can be put there that don't wind up diverging. e.g. `key_present || map.insert(...)`.

Scott: C# has started doing `var x = y ?? throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(y));`, which is this same kind of "perl-like" thing but has been well received. This kind of thing comes up a lot in constructors.

Mara: But in Rust, it's just boolean. But this non-null case is covered by let-else.

Josh: Also, we have the `?` operator for this, right?

Niko: Something like this feels closer:

```rust
let z = y.or_err(...)?;
```

Josh: Would anyone object to an fcp close saying we're not necessarily looking to encourage this pattern, we'd prefer to see this kind of thing done with `let-else` or with `if`.

Niko: Overall, I think I'd prefer to see this written with `if`:

```rust
if ... { panic!() }
```

Mara: `let true = foo else { ... }` is just called `if/else`, right?

Taylor: it's `if !foo` with mandatory divergence.

Niko: I lean negative, but I can see "this is just a lint and it does seem like a false warning at the end of the day".

Josh: I'd feel sadder if I thought this was code we wanted to write.

Niko: no objection to starting an FCP, have to decide whether to check my box.

Scott: I concur with Niko on this one.  This is in the awkward middle ground for lints -- like it would absolutely make sense for me in clippy, and I'd probably leave it on, but I could see that maybe it's too strong for rustc.
- Extra thought: Maybe it's worth splitting into a separate lint name?

### "What is the stability guarantee of `#[track_caller]` locations?" rust#88302

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/88302

### "Tracking Issue for relaxed struct unsizing rules" rust#81793

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81793
