---
title: Triage meeting 2021-08-24
tags: triage-meeting
---

# T-lang meeting agenda

* Meeting date: 2021-08-24

## Attendance

* Team members: nikomatsakis, Josh, Scott, Felix
* Others: simulacrum

## Meeting roles

* Action item scribe: simulacrum
* Note-taker: nikomatsakis

## Scheduled meetings
-  "Structural equality" [lang-team#94](https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/94) 
    -  had this meeting, woohoo! :tada: 
-  "Non-terminal divergence between parser and macro matcher " [lang-team#111](https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/111)
    -  doc should be ready by EOD, if not pnkfelix will cancel

## Action item review

* [Action items list](https://hackmd.io/gstfhtXYTHa3Jv-P_2RK7A)

## Pending lang team project proposals
### "negative impls integrated into coherence" lang-team#96

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/96

### "Trait upcasting coercion" lang-team#98

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/98

### "Deprecate target_vendor " lang-team#102

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/102

### "Non exhaustive reachable patterns lint" lang-team#112

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/112

* Has had some [discussion on Zulip](https://zulip-archive.rust-lang.org/stream/243200-t-lang/major-changes/topic/Non.20exhaustive.20reachable.20patterns.20lint.20lang-team.23112.html#250067353); largely pertaining implementation details
* This has been approved for some time, let's close it and make an initiative

## PRs on the lang-team repo
### "Initial draft of copy ergonomics design note" lang-team#62

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/pull/62

* Assigned to pnkfelix

### "Autoref/autoderef for operators" lang-team#63

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/pull/63

* Assigned to scottmcm

### "Add draft of variadic notes" lang-team#76

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/pull/76

* Assigned to cramertj

### "consensus decision making" lang-team#113

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/pull/113

* pnkfelix to review 

## RFCs waiting to be merged

### "RFC: Supertrait item shadowing" rfcs#2845

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2845

* Action item to merge: already exists (cramertj)
* Reassign to pnkfelix

## Proposed FCPs

**Check your boxes!**
### "RFC: Add `target` configuration" rfcs#2991

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2991

### "RFC: let-expression" rfcs#3159

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3159

Generalization of the `let else` and `if let` chaining proposals. `let` becomes a boolean expression that injects variables into the surrounding scope and returns true/false depending if it matches.

* Josh proposed to close last week:
    * While more orthogonal, feels like "orthogonality too far".
    * Feels like would be orthogonality at the expense of things easy to mentally model and use.
* Scott: that's phrased a bit stronger than I would agree with, but I'm also happy to close this. There's probably a version of this that I like. I've liked talk of an `is` keyword, for example. The "let is an expression everywhere" though seems to get very hairy.
* Josh: I agree, I've come around to thinking that I kind of want `is`. Realized "this is pattern matching but as a suffix", so it chains better. I like `is`. But `let` feels like a statement to me, trying to make that a boolean feels wrong.
* pnkfelix: You mentioned prior discussions, did you mean the ones on the `let/else` RFC or somewhere else?
* Josh: No, from when `if let` chaining was proposed. Contemporary with the if/while/let chains RFC (#2497), there was a different RFC.
    * Net result at the time was that "let as boolean" was a step too far.
* pnkfelix: It'd be nice to have links to those earlier discussions on the RFC thread.
* joshtriplett: I don't recall precisely where that discussion was. 
* pnkfelix: I realize now that your comment wasn't leaning on that logic 
* scottmcm: I think the outcome of this that might make sense is to put an "unresolved question" in the let/else tracking issue for potential future interactions. For example, does this potentially conflict, or did it get complicated enough that we should've done this version?
    * Josh: that's there already, actually. Question about "the final syntax" mentions debating alternatives and consider things like an "expr match pattern".
* Josh: I don't think this should be a blocker for let/else, since if we introduce an `is` syntax, it wouldn't affect let/else.
* Niko: I'd like to have a design note about this space that covers "here were designs that were considered but which we didn't adopt (yet?)". 
* Josh: We could say why we didn't go with "let as a general boolean".
* Niko: I just want to have the designs collected. I think we can say "here are some of the designs and the objections that were raised that caused us not to adopt it", I mostly want to know where to look this up later. 
* Josh: We could add a sub-bullet on if-while-let-chains to have a design note that surveys the space.

### "Tracking issue for RFC 2523, `#[cfg(version(..))]`" rust#64796

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/64796

### "Support `#[track_caller]` on closures and generators" rust#87064

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/87064

* still waiting on ~~nikomatsakis~~, pnkfelix, scottmcm
* determined to be performance neutral

## Active FCPs
### "Stabilize "force warn" option " rust#86516

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/86516

* Revision from last meeting:
    * This option *forces a warning*, it is not a *minimum lint level*
    * Thus even if the lint is "deny", it becomes "warn"
* Feature was intended to allow tooling to find "the set of lints that apply to this code" and it works for this purpose, but it may not work for other purposes.
* There were proposals to rename the option. Has 4 check boxes.
    * e.g., `force-warn-for-cargo-fix`

### "stabilize disjoint capture in closures (RFC 2229)" rust#88126

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/88126

* Tight timeline (for 1.56 release for the edition), but of course still open for discussion
* Last time we discussed and found the edge case `#[non_exhaustive]`
* Question about "how smart" the compiler should be with enum variant
    * Currently: if you match on an enum with a single variant, not considered a discriminant read
* Related to discussion that was happening on union:
    * Does a read of an enum with one union field count as a discriminant read, and hence should it be unsafe?
* We tried to be consistent with the borrow checker, which accepts this code on stable:

```rust
enum Foo { Bar }
let mut x = Foo::Bar;
let y = &mut x;
let Foo::Bar = x;
drop(y);
```

* Probably all of these should be rejected or accepted simultaneously.
* Quite easy to make closure capture consider this a read:
    * Compatible with making it not a read later (sort of)
    * Might change what gets dropped, etc
* Niko: if we tried to make it *considered a read* but consistent, we would be breaking stable code
    * borrow checker / unsafe code
    * but it would be static breakage (more errors)
* Niko: 
    * I tend to think that single variant enums should be consistent with structs, particularly given that it's already stable behavior
    * I can imagine e.g. enums that sometimes generate a single variant and want it to be consistent with a struct in that case
* Scott:
    * And we have non-exhaustive for opting in for this case
* Josh:
    * I think that, if we didn't care about back-compat, I might be inclined to make enums always considered discriminant reads
    * But I would be ok with only handling it for non-exhaustive reads
* scottmcm:
    * union thing is interesting; we don't have a rule that unions always contain at least one valid variant, right?
    * i.e., until you read, it could be completely false?
    * josh: correct
    * so a single variant union is very different from a single variant enum
* josh: question at hand is: if you match on an enum that is inside a union field, and it's a single variant enum, is that considered a read (and therefore requires unsafe)?
* niko: you can ask similar questions about `()` or other nullary structs
* josh: handling the non-exhaustive case is straightforward/
* niko: yes. 
* josh: should we check for consensus about this point then?
    * summary: (no objections raised)
        * disjoint closure capture should be consistent with the borrow checker (i.e., what borrow checker considers a read)
        * matching on a non-exhaustive enum *from another crate* is considered a discriminant read no matter what
        * but otherwise matching on a single variant enum is not considered a discriminant read
            * (but note that `match` separately requires initialization, so matter largely concerns just irrefutable-let)
* niko: 
    * https://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2018/08/13/never-patterns-exhaustive-matching-and-uninhabited-types-oh-my/

```rust
let x: !;
match x { // <= literally zero-armed match
    // currently we add a "fake read" in cases like this
}
```

### "Stabilize reserved prefixes" rust#88140

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/88140

* Tight timeline (for 1.56 release for the edition), but of course still open for discussion
* Need a PR for the reference!

### "negative impls integrated into coherence" lang-team#96

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/96

### "Trait upcasting coercion" lang-team#98

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/98

### "Non exhaustive reachable patterns lint" lang-team#112

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/issues/112



## P-critical issues

None. :tada: 




## Nominated RFCs, PRs and issues


### "Make `#[derive(A, B, ...)]` cfg-eval its input only for `A, B, ...` and stabilize `feature(macro_attributes_in_derive_output)`" rust#87220

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/87220

### "Stabilize built-in attribute macro `#[cfg_eval]`" rust#87221

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/87221

### "Niches of `Cell` and others still not hidden" rust#87341

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/87341

* In https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/68491 pnkfelix added option to hide niches for unsafe cell
    * This is so that `Option<Mutex<X>>` doesn't use any bits from within the mutex to store whether `Option` is `Some` or `None`
    * Similarly:
        * `Option<Cell<X>>` exposes niches
* scottmcm: aren't mutexes a *box* impl? is it happening because mutex is a box?
* nikomatsakis: for `Cell`, this is potentially sound, right?
* action item:
    * confirm whether the niche on `Mutex` is coming from the box or what?
* nikomatsakis: things that wrap unsafe cells should have to "opt-in" to niches
    * then we can discuss whether cell should opt-in
* scottmcm: so perhaps cell *should* expose its niches, but not for this reason
* pnkfelix: not sure about should but *could*, yes, it's debatable
* mark: pretty sure that the niche for mutex comes from the `inner` field, which is fine:

```rust
pub struct Mutex<T: ?Sized> {
    inner: sys::MovableMutex,
    poison: poison::Flag,
    data: UnsafeCell<T>,
}
```

* pnkfelix: `#[repr(no_niche)]` is totally busted right now. But for mutex itself, we could add `#[repr(no_niche)]` there too, in order to hide it.
* conclusion:
    * Mutex and RwLock and friends we *believe* to be exposing the niche from the boxed `inner` field. This is not a soundness nor stability hazard insofar as niches are not guaranteed by semver, but we may wish to disable it so that moving to a non-allocated Mutex has even less potential for disruption. (This particular call, whether to exclude niches, feels more libs than lang.)
    * Cell (and anything where the niche is within an UnsafeCell (or other type with repr(no_niche))) is a bug.
        * It is plausible that Cell *could* opt-in, but we should first fix the bug so that opt-in is required.
        * We should just fix this bug about propagation.
* Mark to post conclusion and pnkfelix to follow up on the bug fix.

### "Which patterns on union fields should be considered safe?" rust#87520

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/87520

* We discussed single-variant enums earlier (and must-use).
* Last time there was a sense that the meeting didn't reach a conclusion, more "pre-writing" was needed.
* scottmcm: My general feeling on union here is that part of the advantage of the whole move to "THIR" instead of "MIR" is that we can just say that unions are categorically unsafe without having to worry about whether there is *actually* a read.
* niko: I could see the advantage of a blanket rule to make things easier to understand.
* scottmcm: sort of the opposite of the closure capture. Closure capture is very much "we are moving this to MIR because we want MIR-like rules", which means it's very semantically based and exceptions make sense. Versus here, where it's motivated by making unsafe more syntactic and easier to think about.
* niko: for closures, we generally want you to be able to copy-and-paste code into closures and it still borrow checks with as close fidelity as we can manage, but I don't see a corresponding principle around unions.
    * I favor either *very simple* or *very semantic* and not some hybrid.
* joshtriplett: I agree with that
* scottmcm: for unsafe I feel that simple is better
* josh: starting simple and loosening makes some sense, long term there is a desire to loosen things based on the safe-transmute rules
    * the question is how much do we want to allow in safe code now
* scottmcm: the nice thing we have with unions now: writing to unions in stable is always safe right now, because it's always manually drop
    * so I think reading from unions being unsafe, the slight pain from that is offset by writing is safe
    * niko: conservation of safe
* niko: to clarify, josh, if you had unions of two types, even if they can be safely transmuted to one another, you can't know the union itself is initialized?
* josh: true, but you'd have to permit reads that "fully occupy the space", i.e., where any set of bits are needed
* scottmcm: depends on whether it covers uninit
    * If UCG ends up at *not* having the "at least one variant is valid" rule, it would be sound to have a safe `union`-only `mem::uninitialized`, which would prevent things like "it's safe to read from a `u32`/`f32` union" ever.
* josh: short term question is: 
    * what should we do that is the most conservative, future-compatible thing
* niko: and backwards compatibility
* josh: I think the cases where we might change it are fairly niche (no pun intended)
* niko's proposal: simple rules and a crater run to gain data
    * niko to post (action item)
* josh: the fact that we lint on whether an unsafe block is *necessary* makes backwards compatibility harder here
    * niko: because people are less likely to have unsafe blocks that they didnt actually need
    * josh: because of deny-warnings -- may be sufficiently annoying to produce a lot of noise

### "Disable unused_must_use for statically known bools" rust#88028

**Link:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/88028


